# 3.1.2 Coding Health Records

The limitations of text-based records noted in the previous section can be addressed by using codes to represent information that needs to be reported consistently. The extent of coding that is required depends on the types of reporting and analytics that need to be supported. Limited coding data may be sufficient to meet management, billing, and general health statistics. However, more detailed clinical coding is necessary to support detailed clinical analytics, research, and decision support. The following subsections discuss different approaches to coding clinical records.

# Retrospective Manual Coding

Codes can be added retrospectively based on a review of paper-based or electronic health records by a coding specialist or health professional. This approach is not recommended for detailed coding of clinical data using SNOMED CT but it is often used to record [ICD-10](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCGLOSS/ICD-10 "Glossary link: ICD-10") classification codes at the end of an [inpatient episode](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCGLOSS/inpatient+episode "Glossary link: inpatient episode"). The resulting coded data may meet requirements for management, statistical, and epidemiological reporting. However, as noted in [Table 3.1.2-1](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCCTXSIG/3.1.2+Coding+Health+Records#Table-retro-coding-limitations "Differences Between Retrospective Manual Coding and Coding During Data Entry"), this approach to coding has several significant limitations when applied to more detailed clinical data.

# Coding During Data Entry

An EHR system may facilitate SNOMED CT coding during data entry in various ways. These include structured form controls (e.g. checkboxes, radio buttons, and drop-down lists) and SNOMED CT searches, which may be constrained to particular subsets of concepts 1.

# Automated Coding

[Natural language processing (NLP](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCGLOSS/Natural+language+processing+\(NLP "Glossary link: Natural language processing \(NLP")) may be used to apply relevant SNOMED CT codes to structured data and/or free-text entries in an EHR. These techniques may be applied during data entry but can also be applied retrospectively to past records. The accuracy of NLP systems varies and depends on the structure and consistency of the original records. Results of automated retrospective coding may be sufficient for some types of reporting and analysis. However, the accuracy and reliability of the results of these processes need extensive review before using the results as a basis for clinical decision-making. 

Table 3.1.2-1: Differences Between Retrospective Manual Coding and Coding During Data Entry

**Factor**| **Retrospective Manual Coding**| **Coding During Data Entry**  
---|---|---  
**Effort, accuracy, and completeness**|  Accurate retrospective coding depends on the coder's ability to interpret records. This requires coders, who understand coding rules and can accurately interpret record entries. The quality, clarity, and completeness of record entries may vary and, as a result, retrospective coding is a time-consuming task for skilled staff.Limitations noted in [Table 3.1.1-1 Limitations of Free-Text Recording](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCCTXSIG/3.1.1+Free-Text+Health+Records#Table-text-limitations "3.1.1 Free-Text Health Records") may impact the accuracy of interpretation of records during the process of retrospective coding.| EHR systems that are designed to facilitate SNOMED CT coding during data entry remove the need for retrospective coding. Effective techniques for   
**Coding Scope  
**|  As noted above, accurate retrospective manual coding is a resource-intensive task. Therefore, this technique can usually only be applied to a small number of key data items. As a result, some data that may be relevant to reporting and analysis may not be coded.For example, the coding of an [inpatient episode](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCGLOSS/inpatient+episode "Glossary link: inpatient episode") may be limited to reasons for admission, discharge diagnoses, major procedures, and outcome. While this data may be adequate for management statistics it is unlikely to be sufficient for detailed clinical analytics.| EHR systems that facilitate SNOMED CT coding an integral part of data entry, make it feasible to code a wider range of types of data.  
  
* * *

##### Footnotes

1

Specific guidance on techniques to define constrained terminology searches to data entry of particular types of data is included in section [5.1 What is Terminology Binding?](278301526.html). Two other documents provide additional relevant material. The [SNOMED CT Search and Data Entry Guide](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCSEARCH/SNOMED+CT+Search+and+Data+Entry+Guide) describes techniques using data entry controls and terminology searches. The [SNOMED CT Terminology Services Guide](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCTSG/SNOMED+CT+Terminology+Services+Guide) provides technical guidance on terminology services required to support data entry ([3.2 Support EHR Data Entry](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCTSG/3.2+Support+EHR+Data+Entry)) and technical details of services that implement constrained SNOMED CT searches ([4.8 Find Concepts](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCTSG/4.8+Find+Concepts)).

  

