# Data Representation Challenges

Accurate and consistent data representation is essential for ensuring interoperability, data quality, and meaningful exchange of healthcare information. However, challenges arise when clinical data is represented in ways that are inconsistent or ambiguous. These issues can lead to misinterpretation, data loss, and hindered communication between systems.

## Inconsistent Data Representation

Inconsistencies in data representation in healthcare can significantly impact patient care and operational efficiency. These inconsistencies often arise from the use of varied formats, terminologies, and levels of detail across different healthcare systems and providers. For instance, one clinic might use a simple model to record basic information about a patient's examination, such as general appearance and basic vital signs, while another might employ a detailed model capturing extensive metrics, including specific observations on each body system. Such disparities can lead to challenges in sharing and interpreting data, causing potential miscommunication or loss of critical patient information. Furthermore, the lack of standardized data representation complicates the aggregation and analysis of healthcare data for research and quality improvement, ultimately affecting the ability to deliver consistent, high-quality patient care.

Even when using the same terminology, the representation of information in healthcare can vary significantly. For example, standards like SNOMED CT provide a comprehensive set of terms for encoding clinical data, but the application of these standards can differ among systems, providers, and users. Different electronic health record (EHR) systems may implement SNOMED CT differently, affecting how data is recorded and retrieved. In addition to this, implementations may change over time, adopting different conventions in the same system.

The representation of information containing contextual factors can vary significantly based on the design of the systems and their underlying information models. Specifically, within the recording of clinical data, key contextual factors include presence/absence indicators, temporal context, and subject relationship.

1. **Presence/Absence Indicators:** Indicating the presence or absence of specific conditions, symptoms, or risk factors is essential for accurately documenting a patient's health status, tracking disease progression, and monitoring treatment outcomes.
2. **Temporal Context:** The timing of events, such as the onset of symptoms, duration of treatment, or frequency of occurrences, provides valuable context for understanding a patient's medical history and informing clinical decision-making.
3. **Subject Relationship:** This contextual factor pertains to understanding who the condition or procedure relates to, such as family history or genetic predisposition. Clarifying subject relationships can provide insights into disease etiology, risk assessment, and personalized treatment strategies.

Incorporating these contextual factors into the recording of clinical data enhances the comprehensiveness, accuracy, and relevance of health information, facilitating more informed clinical decisions and improved patient outcomes. However, variations in how these factors are captured and represented across different systems and information models underscore the need for standardized approaches and interoperable systems to ensure consistency and compatibility in healthcare data management.

## Ambiguous Data Representation

SNOMED CT [concepts](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCGLOSS/concept) enable consistent representation and analysis of clinical ideas. However, the same _concept_ can be used in different contexts in the information model of an [electronic health record (EHR](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCGLOSS/electronic+health+record)) and, as illustrated by the examples in [Table 2.3.2-1](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCCTXSIG/2.3.2+Ambiguous+Data+Representation#Table-context-examples), the context may fundamentally affect the meaning. Therefore, accurate interpretation of an EHR entry depends on understanding both the meaning of the concept \_\_ when encountered in isolation,\_\_ and how that meaning is modified by associated contextual information.

### **Diseases and Disorders**

An EHR entry containing a _concept_ that represents a disease might be assumed to imply an assertion that the subject of that record currently has that disease.

Associated contextual information may make this assumption incorrect.

<table data-full-width="true"><thead><tr><th>Domain</th><th>Example Concepts</th><th>Possible Interpretations</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td><p></p><p><br>&#x3C;  <a href="http://snomed.info/id/64572001">64572001 |Disease (disorder)|</a>  </p></td><td><p><a href="http://snomed.info/id/22298006">22298006 | myocardial infarction (disorder)|</a></p><p><br><a href="http://snomed.info/id/46635009">46635009 | Diabetes mellitus type 1|</a></p></td><td><p><strong>Possible diagnosis</strong>: A note that this diagnosis is being considered or investigated.</p><p></p><p><strong>Excluded diagnosis</strong>: An assertion that this diagnosis has been ruled out.</p><p></p><p><strong>Medical history</strong>: An indication of whether the subject of the record has previously had this disorder. In the case of a chronic condition, such as diabetes mellitus, the diagnosis remains relevant but may be distinct from the diagnosis of the presenting complaint.</p><p></p><p><strong>Family history</strong>: An indication of whether any members of the subject's family have had this disorder.</p></td></tr></tbody></table>

### **Symptom and Signs**

An EHR entry containing a _concept_ that represents a symptom might be assumed to imply that the subject of the record states that they currently have that symptom. Similarly, a concept that represents a clinical sign may seem to indicate that this sign has been found when examining the patient.

Associated contextual information may make these assumptions incorrect.

<table data-full-width="true"><thead><tr><th>Domain</th><th>Example Concepts</th><th>Possible Interpretations</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>&#x3C;  <a href="http://snomed.info/id/404684003">404684003 |Clinical finding (finding)|</a>  MINUS &#x3C;&#x3C;  <a href="http://snomed.info/id/64572001">64572001 |Disease (disorder)|</a></td><td><p><a href="http://snomed.info/id/21522001">21522001 | abdominal pain|</a><br><a href="http://snomed.info/id/249545003">249545003 | abdominal guarding|</a></p><p><br></p></td><td><p><strong>Past history of a symptom:</strong> A symptom that was present but is not currently present. </p><p></p><p><strong>Absent symptom:</strong> A note that the subject reports that they have not had this symptom.</p><p></p><p><strong>Negative sign:</strong> An indication that the examination did not detect the clinical sign.</p><p></p><p><strong>Sign not tested:</strong> An indication that the clinical sign was not checked.</p></td></tr></tbody></table>

### **Procedures**

An EHR entry containing a _concept_ that represents a procedure might be assumed to imply that the procedure has been carried on on the subject of the record.

Associated contextual information may make this assumption incorrect.

<table data-full-width="true"><thead><tr><th width="217.72265625">Domain</th><th>Example Concepts</th><th>Possible Interpretations</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>&#x3C;  <a href="http://snomed.info/id/71388002">71388002 |Procedure|</a></td><td><a href="http://snomed.info/id/770606008">770606008 | Total replacement of left hip joint (procedure)|</a><br><a href="http://snomed.info/id/271236005">271236005 | Serum potassium measurement|</a><br><br></td><td><p><strong>Requested procedure:</strong> A request for a procedure to be considered or done, which is submitted to an appropriate <a href="https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCGLOSS/healthcare+provider">healthcare provider</a>.</p><p></p><p><strong>Planned procedure:</strong> A note of a decision to carry out the procedure at some point in the future.</p><p></p><p><strong>Admitted for a procedure:</strong> An indication that the reason for admission is to carry out a procedure.</p><p></p><p><strong>Procedure not done:</strong> An indication that the procedure was not carried out.</p></td></tr></tbody></table>

### Observations

An EHR entry containing a _concept_ that represents an observable entity might be assumed to imply that an observation had been made.

Associated contextual information may make this assumption incorrect.

<table data-full-width="true"><thead><tr><th>Domain</th><th>Example Concepts</th><th>Possible Interpretations</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>&#x3C;  <a href="http://snomed.info/id/363787002">363787002 |Observable entity|</a></td><td><a href="http://snomed.info/id/386725007">386725007 | Body temperature|</a><br><a href="http://snomed.info/id/698824001">698824001 | Expiratory tidal volume|</a></td><td><p><strong>Scheduled observations:</strong> A plan for regular observations associated with a particular procedure or assessment.</p><p></p><p><strong>Data entry label:</strong> The observation is only known to have been done if its results are recorded.</p><p></p><p><strong>Observation not done:</strong> An indication that observation was not made.</p></td></tr></tbody></table>






<a href="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScTmbZIf0UEQwYDkY27EEWBkaiYkHSbR0_9DmFrMLXoQLyL7Q/viewform?usp=pp_url&entry.1767247133=NCPT+IG&entry.670899847=Data%20Representation%20Challenges" class="button primary">Provide Feedback</a>
